US President Joe Biden's flown in and
out of Israel today on a whirlwind 8
hour trip a trip that's been
overshadowed by last night's blast at a
hospital in Gaza Israel maintains it
wasn't responsible but not everyone
agrees Hamas Palestinian authorities and
other Arab Nations have blamed Israel
for the explosion which has triggered
protests across the Middle East
meanwhile Britain's foreign office is
advising its citizens against all travel
to Lebanon due to the risks associated
with the conflict between Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories now to
discuss all of this with me tonight our
panel is Tom peek a political sketch
writer for the independent and Amanda
renia a democratic and policy strategist
and former top campaign Aid to Hillary
[Music]
Clinton good evening the US President
Joe Biden has today pledged solidarity
with Israel during a world wind 8-hour
visit but his trip was overshadowed by
last night's blast at a hospital in Gaza
which the gazan health Ministry says
killed 471 people its inflamed tensions
and sparked protests across the region
Israel's maintained it was not
responsible saying the blast was caused
by a rocket misfired by the Palestinian
militant group Islamic Jihad today
President Joe Biden agreed with Israel's
leader saying it appears that the blast
was done by the other team but Hamas
Palestinian authorities and other Arab
Nations have blamed Israel for the
explosion which has triggered protests
across the Middle East the BBC is trying
to verify the claims from both sides
well after the two leaders had talks Mr
Netanyahu called Mr Biden a true friend
saying that he commends his deeply
moving decision to visit Israel during
the war well following the president's V
visit Israel said it will not thwart the
delivery of food water and medicine from
Egypt for civilians in Gaza as long as
this Aid does not reach Hamas for days
people there have been fleeing their
homes to escape Israeli strikes which
palestinia authorities in Gaza say have
killed more than 3,400 People Israel
says it's targeting members of Hamas a
group designated as a terror
organization by the UK government all of
this follows the deaths of around 1,400
people in attacks by Hamas on Southern
Israel 11 days ago well let's begin this
hours of coverage with this report from
our International editor Jeremy Bowen on
President Biden's crucial diplomatic
Mission a warning that there are some
graphic details in his
report a car park outside the alaki
hospital became a killing
ground the arguments about who's
responsible come too late for the people
whose lives ended
here even with their bodies Tak away the
clean up this morning also meant
collecting small pieces of
Flesh God have mercy he said they were
civilians and Muhammad Al Safi a
neighbor can't unsee children with legs
blown off and the bodies he helped
carry they all he said thought they'd be
safe near a
hospital early this morning at the
defense Ministry in Tel Aviv the
military presented data it said proved
Israel did not attack the hospital
instead they said it was a
malfunctioning rocket fired by
Palestinian Islamic
Jihad the trajectory analysis from the
barriage of rockets confirms that the
Rockets were fired close proximity to
the
hospital according to our intelligence
Hamas checked the reports understood it
was an Islamic Jihad
rocket that had misfired and decided to
launch a global media campaign to hide
what really
happened they went as far as inflating
the numbers of
casualties coming to Tel Aviv was a
gamble for President Biden he wanted to
ease gaza's humanitarian catastrophe
while supporting Israel's war effort
perhaps an impossible Circle to square
with Israel's leader Benjamin
Netanyahu but a deal emerged from their
meeting food water and medicine but no
fuel from Egypt to Gaza for Israel more
military aid and agreement that they
didn't hit the hospital and based on
what I've seen it appears as though it
was done by the other team not not you I
wanted to personally come and make that
clear
thank you for having me and uh I'm
looking forward to having a thorough
discussion about where everybody goes
from here the president won't change the
minds of those who insist Israel attack
the hospital Joe Biden's presence here
will only deepen the conviction among
Palestinians and millions of other Arabs
that America isn't just on Israel's side
but that it's also complicit in
everything Israel is doing in Gaza
including killing
civilians until the Hamas attacks on
Israel President Biden dreamt of
transforming the Middle East the
Americans were negotiating with Saudi
Arabia and Israel to try to get the two
countries to recognize each other that
is not on the agenda
anymore in Arab capitals there have been
protests against Israel this was
Beirut
and this is SAR in Yemen so far the
shouting has spread but not the fighting
keeping it that way will be a
challenge Jeremy Bowen BBC News
Israel well joining me now from
Washington DC is Asher Castlebury
Hernandez a former US state department
senior advisor to the Bureau of NE
Eastern Affairs welcome to the context
Asher if you were advising President
Biden you have told him to make this
trip yes I would have um I think it's
imperative that President Biden shows
that he is committed to uh achieving
Regional peace and security uh I think
it's very important that he's also
showing that he's in support of the
security of the state of Israel as well
as ensuring that um the message is um
important that everybody knows this is
all about uh innocent civilians and
protecting innocent civilians and making
sure that they receive humanitarian
assistance so his leadership or his
presence in the region definitely is
going to resonate and it's important
that he is there so clearly there's been
a breakthrough we we think when it comes
to getting aid from Egypt into Gaza
remains to be seen whether and when that
actually happens but there's certainly
been a promise now from Israel on that
but can the president's visit really
deescalate what is by all accounts a
situation that seems to be escalating by
the hour
his presence will be able to ensure that
uh again that the state of Israel along
with key Partners uh are receiving
enough support uh that are receiving
ensuring that that he has a good outlook
of the operational environment and that
he can make the best decisions as far as
how to move forward with regards to
peace and security so I think it it does
resonate I think it you know interaction
with our partners in person especially
about the hostage Affairs issue is
definitely going to be helpful in terms
of being a game changer as we are
dealing with a very complex operational
security environment but the problem is
there wasn't interaction in person with
with other key leaders in that part of
the world uh including from the
Palestinian Authority other countries
like Jordan um so it wasn't really the
the overwhelming kind of uh consolidator
visit that the president was hoping for
because he only really met Israeli
leaders that is true but uh but the good
thing about it is that he has his
secretary state along with other senior
officials that are able to uh cover down
with those interactions like secretary
blinkin to ensure that that the
humanitarian assistance uh mission is is
being completed as well as that the
hostage Affairs uh uh issue is also
being effectively coordinated so um we
know that because it's such a comp Lex
uh evolving issue that you know it
realistically it does it is very
difficult for the president to be able
to meet everyone or all the key Partners
what would you say is President Biden's
next step in this
now uh I think it's it's it's it's uh
extremely important that President Biden
uh works and looks very closely at the
hostage Affairs issue uh ensuring that
those innocent people whether Israeli
palestini as well
Americans uh are are you know we're able
to get them back protected provide
humanitarian assistance I think that's
the highest priority right now um and
then work you know very closely with the
Israeli Defense Force ensuring that that
happens so I think the hosage Affairs uh
um situation is extremely important it's
the number one priority in ensuring that
uh we are not detrimentally impacted or
a lot more this issue does not
exacerbate more in terms of especially
when it comes to Americans as far as uh
making sure that these Americans are
returned back so definitely the priority
right now I think there's concern for
everyone uh no matter what their
nationality do stay with us Asher let's
bring in our panel Tom peek a political
sketch writer for the independent and
Amanda renia a democratic and policy
strategist and of course a former top
campaign Aid to Hillary Clinton um
Amanda what do you make of the president
visit it didn't go according to plan
let's be blunt about
it listen this is a President Who
consistently in his presidency goes to
the front lines looks people in the eye
builds the kinds of relationships and
understanding of what is happening by
being there and so that has been
consistent with his presidency of course
this is way more complicated and I think
it was even more important to be on the
ground to establish those relationships
to listen to what is happening he has
folks on the ground that are going to
stay there who have been there who can
really give him the information he needs
I do think as this relationship moves
forward it is going to be important for
President Biden to keep um Israel that
relationship accountable to making sure
it gets we get Aid into the ga into Gaza
it's also going to be really important
for him to continue to reach out to
those other partners that he was not
able to talk to in this time which is
also exactly who he is he doesn't give
up picking up the phone to build
relationships and that's going to be
incredibly important right now as we
move forward in these next several days
weeks months Tom let's bring you in
we're hearing that British prime
minister Rishi sunak is going to be
traveling to Israel next um so there's a
lot of world leaders who want to go
there but what difference do you think
Mr sunak is going to
make well there's not really very much
difference any world leader could make
and rich richy sunak is not the
president of the United States of
America the point of this there are
there are no good outcomes so when you
judge whether or not someone's visit has
been successful or unsuccessful it has
the context has to be that there there
are no good outcomes it's very hard for
these things to be construed in anyway
as a success the point of Israel's uh if
you like Western allies going to visit
them there are two purposes one is to
show solidarity with a country that was
a victim of an appalling appalling
terrorist terrorist attack and the other
purpose is to try and contain that
country's Rage which which is exactly
what President Biden said in the clip
that you've shown to to get it to act to
get it to pursue Justice ra rather than
Vengeance because if they don't do that
then it the risks of escalation are
enormous I suspect that if you are
Netanyahu who is the trying to be the
voice of the average Israeli you are
more answerable to that sense of
visceral rage that your population are
feeling than you are to a pressure put
upon you by world leaders ERS to act in
a measured way you just have to hope
that they win but precisely the amount
of influence someone like rishy sunak
can wield in that situation I think it's
quite minimal but there are plenty of
them which there's there's Biden there's
tunak um Ola Schulz has already been
hasn't he you have to hope to see more
of this and then slowly slowly slowly
you can try and persuade Israel to
respond in a more measured fashion but
it won't be easy Asher we heard from
President Biden warning that Israel
shouldn't act with raage
cautioning about what he described as
mistakes which the US made after 911
what did you make about that warning
shot from President
Biden well uh when you look at the
security environment it tells you a lot
about the information flow or the
information environment and the reaction
and I think that was a good move of what
he said because we does not want the bad
reaction to subsequently happen because
it makes the operational environment a
lot more complex and dangerous so I
think that's his commanderin-chief style
of ensuring that he sends those signals
or communicates effectively to everyone
around the world that look there's
information running around uh and this
is the accuracy that uh the the verocity
of what is going on and it's very
important that we we react accordingly
and not be too uh um uh you know
reactive in terms of of inflaming uh
danger to others and just destabilizing
Iz in the operational environment